[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Somehow or other, our minds
are able to access a connection
independently of
distance and time.
>> If you get that contact
realizing that there is
a source to everything.
>> We don't have the English
words to describe what happens
in that experience.
What is this showing me?
What is it's showing us as
human beings about who we are?
>> We can use this as a form
of guidance that lights our way
along the path of life.
[THEME MUSIC]
>> My daddy and I had
traveled in Egypt many times.
But on this particular
occasion, early in 1996,
we found ourselves in the King's
Chamber of the Great Pyramid
all alone, which was a
very unusual occurrence.
Prior to this, we'd
always been surrounded
by so many other people.
Well, for those of
you who've actually
experienced the
King's Chamber, you'll
know that it has an
extraordinary acoustic quality.
This sarcophagus is a
block of granite 3.7 tons
that's been hollowed out.
It's supposed to be the
interment for King Khufu
or Cheops.
Many people disagree
with that concept.
But nevertheless, if you strike
the side of it with your fist,
it rings like a
low-pitched bell.
And, of course, as an acoustics
engineer at that time,
I was fascinated by the
sounds that sarcophagus made.
So I'd always wanted to lie in
the sarcophagus and make sound.
And never until this
time in early '96
did I have the opportunity.
Anyway, I did lie
in the sarcophagus
and I made a vocal glissando.
And at one particular
frequency, every cell in my body
seemed to tingle.
And a wave of acoustic energy
washed up and down my body,
and goosebumps broke
out all over my flesh.
And it really got my
attention and I thought, wow,
having at that point in my
career spent almost 30 years
studying sound in various
acoustics environments,
I'd never come across
anything quite like this.
So when we got back to
the UK, I made enquiries
with the Egyptian authorities.
It was not easy.
But several months
later, I returned
to Egypt armed with lots of
acoustics instrumentation.
About three weeks before
going out to Egypt in '97,
I severely injured
my lower back.
And, oh, my goodness,
the pain was very severe.
And it was so severe
that I actually
thought I was going to have
to cancel the whole mission.
But I paid a lot of money
to the Egyptian Antiquities
Department.
So I just gritted my
teeth and somehow I
managed to get myself
into the Great Pyramid.
This experiment consisted
of stretching a membrane
across the open top of the
sarcophagus, this granite box.
And in the bottom of the
granite box, this time,
I had a small loudspeaker.
Sprinkling sand
onto the membrane
itself would create
the cymatics experiment
that I wanted to conduct.
Cymatics is the science
of sound made visible.
We switched on the
electronic oscillator
and expected to see a series
of geometric patterns.
Up to that point in
my career, that's
all I had ever seen-- just
simple geometric patterns.
What happened was
that a whole series
of ancient Egyptian hieroglyphs
began to emerge in the sand.
I actually had no idea,
I had no expectation
of seeing ancient Egyptian
hieroglyphs on this membrane.
But after about 20 minutes of
making sound in the sarcophagus
and taking all these
photographs and seeing
all these amazing ancient
Egyptian hieroglyphs appearing
on the membrane in
these sand patterns,
I suddenly realized that all
the pain in my lower back
had left me.
Well, in that moment,
actually, the thought
that went through my mind
was I know what this.
This is endorphins.
These are endorphins
flowing in my bloodstream.
I'm so happy seeing
these and excited
seeing these ancient
Egyptian hieroglyphs.
And I thought, well, when I
get back out of the pyramid
and get back to the hotel,
the pain will come back.
But the pain never
did come back.
So that really got my attention.
I thought, this
is extraordinary.
How could the pain
just suddenly vanish?
Remembering that I'd
been in severe pain
for up to three weeks
before going out to Egypt.
The other thing, of course, was
that the cymatics experiment
was phenomenally successful.
Seeing ancient Egyptian
hieroglyphs appear in sand
on a membrane in
the King's Chamber,
I mean, who would
have thought it?
I certainly didn't
expect that at all.
This seemed to be designed.
This didn't seem to
me to be happenstance.
I thought that somehow,
for some reason,
the ancient Egyptians had
decided to create this effect.
>> What we're realizing now as
cosmologists and as scientists
across many fields of research
is coming to stand alongside
these ancient spiritual
understandings.
That actually the
energy and matter
and space and time
of our universe
are expressions of
a deeper reality.
So they are the appearance
of our universe,
but they're not its
foundational truth.
And its foundational
truth is that our universe
emerges from realms of
essentially cosmic causation,
intention.
So our universe has meaning
and purpose and a journey.
The ancients were very smart.
I mean, they were at
least as smart as we are,
they just had less stuff.
>> These ancient cultures
who weren't so distracted
by developing new inventions
and all the stuff that we love
and do all the time, what
was it that they had that we
don't have?
And what has been lost as
we've gained what we've got?
>> I came to Mexico the first
time in 1979 to Chichén Itzá,
which is a World Heritage
Site with two or three million
people every year visiting,
and was stunned to see that
their main pyramid was
dedicated to a snake.
I mean, what's
that, you might say.
And then, of course,
I learned later
that the mighty city of
Teotihuacán outside of Mexico
City, its central pyramid
is devoted to Quetzalcoatl,
the plumed serpent.
Then you can go around the
world, the biblical story
about the serpent, the
Aborigines in Australia,
they worshipped a Rainbow
Serpent as their creator God.
In China, serpentine
dragons were the big thing
in divine matters, so to speak.
People all over the world
would look upon serpents
as being the creator
gods, or dragons maybe.
So it's clear,
there's something here
modern people have lost
their contact with.
Our state of consciousness is
completely different from what
it was 1,000, 2,000 years
ago, and even more so
if you go back 50,000 years ago.
And what that means is that
in the state of consciousness,
they, as well as all our
ancient people saw that.
Of course, there are
serpents and dragons,
they were living in a world of
spirits that most of us cannot
see in our current default
state of consciousness.
But in their default
state of consciousness,
it was possible to see
it and experience it.
That means that they had access
to a domain of experience
that, for the most part,
we don't have anymore.
Shamanic peoples, and I
would say Indigenous peoples
in general, they look upon
reality as multi-dimensional.
In the default state
of modern people,
it's just a rational
physical reality around them,
so to speak.
A spiritual experience
is about seeing
things that are outside
of our physical reality.
>> Where do I go when I die?
It's such a beautiful question.
And one of the answers
is, that you don't.
Your body goes in the
ground, we understand that.
Your personality diffuses in
whatever way that it does.
But you are already everywhere.
So how is it that you think
you're going to go somewhere?
You've always been there.
>> People seem to be more
concerned about what it takes
on the way to death, what
the experience might be,
how you die.
So not necessarily
what comes after it,
but what leads up to it.
Long illnesses
and how might that
be more difficult than
dying all at once,
let's say, or dropping
dead of a heart attack.
And, is one way of dying better
than another way of dying?
And the spirits will
even bring this up.
They will discuss the experience
of what leads up to death.
How someone demonstrated their
love by caring for a person?
What were the conversations
that were had?
We have such issues
around dying.
It seems that that's where the
issues are, not around death
itself as much.
We think that we
are losing people.
We think that there is no
way back to the relationship.
That the relationship is lost.
The communication is lost.
The physicality of
that person is lost.
What I have learned over
time is the physicality
is even part of our
spirit relationship.
So the spirits will
still have an effect
here in the physical world
because after all, they
are energy.
And energy changes form,
but it doesn't disappear,
it isn't created.
And so in this way, things
in our life can move.
We can be inspired.
There can be
continued connection
with those who have passed.
>> My mother passed a
few years before my dad.
And one day, I
woke up from sleep.
And clear as AT&T can make
it, my mom's voice said,
your dad's going to die
soon and it's no big deal.
And he died soon.
So she's giving me
a little heads up.
All the senses can be involved
rather than they hear a voice.
Like telepathically, when
my grandfather comes to me--
he's been long gone--
I smell Captain
Black pipe tobacco.
Some people, their
grandmother's cookies.
>> When I was speaking to
a group of college students
and giving messages, the
physicist Niels Bohr showed up
next to a young man who didn't
believe in this work at all.
He was gobsmacked because he was
writing a paper on Niels Bohr's
work and how it could be
furthered on this planet now.
There was a musician
who came to see me,
and Woody Guthrie showed up
with her-- surprise, surprise.
Well, it turns out she was
doing her first concert outdoors
and it was Woody Guthrie music.
And he was there inspiring her.
Spirits we do not personally
know but may be connected
through their work or a through
line of what they started here
on this planet,
we can be inspired
and we can be helped
by them as well.
When we die, we
do not die alone.
Which is very important
for people to know,
especially if they can't
be with a loved one.
Those in spirit who
have gone before
are actually present with
the person who is dying.
No matter how quickly
that person may die,
no matter how tragically,
no matter how suddenly,
no matter how traumatically.
There is a group that is present
helping that person to pass.
Now in some dramatic
situations, two young children
were killed by their father,
who then killed himself.
When I spoke with
these children,
the father was not present.
So I spoke with just the boys.
So there is also
protection, separation,
different frequencies
depending where people fall
and what people's
intentions are.
So we are not forced to be
with the people who have maybe
affected our passing.
I've also spoken
with families who
have gone down
together in a plane
and they have been together.
They held hands
all the way through
and were met by family members
who reached out and grabbed
their hands.
And they walked-- they
didn't even crash.
They were out of their bodies
before the crash even happened.
So know that each person
is being taken care of.
>> The role of religion
can be facilitative.
And at some point,
it may be like a pair
of shoes you've grown out of.
So be discerning.
No baby out with the bathwater.
There's mystical traditions
in every religion that
talk about ecstasy states,
talk about a lot of what
we're talking about here.
And then there's the
pedantic, legalistic type
of religious thought.
>> In karma what happens is
that you have many lives.
>> When I spent
time in Thailand,
I really dealt with
the idea of karma.
>> Well, who decides how we're
going to become conscious
again, or if we're going
to come back to this world?
When people say, if
you're a good person
you'll have a better next life.
>> Part of what the spirits do
when they speak to us is show
us how to be free from
repetitive patterns which can
look like karma but may be more
unhealed inheritances that we
have received from
parent to child.
And whenever it looks like we're
stuck in a pattern we can't get
out of, we may call that karma.
>> Why would you even
want to come back here?
To have a better car
and a better house?
And given the fact that
there's probably no time,
who says that you
get better in order?
Maybe you were already
as good as you can get
and it's your job to get
less better every time.
I don't know.
We get to be thoughtful
about these things.
That's one of the things
that happens with people
who meditate is, I
think, well, if I'm not
going to think about
the past or the future,
what am I going to think about?
Well, I'll think about
the nature of being.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I actually hid the abilities
that I had for many years
because I wanted to fit in.
I worked in university
administration.
I worked in corporate human
resources for a major company.
And I guess life is what
happens while you're
busy making other plans.
I had a near-death experience.
And after that, it
rearranged my priorities
about what's important to
me in life, in after life.
So now I'm devoted
to teaching people
how to make their own direct
connection with their guides,
with their beloved people
and pets and spirit,
with their own soul,
the higher self.
>> My girlfriend and her son
were in this horrific car
accident.
Mary Fran was killed
outright and her son, Nolan,
who just turned seven, had
this mortal head wound.
They put him in intensive care.
And he was in that
space for six days.
He never regained
consciousness but he
was fighting for his life.
>> What happened to me was I had
anaphylaxis and went into full
shock, where my breathing
stopped and my heart stopped.
And fortunately, I was
at the doctor's office
when that happened and was given
injections to come right back.
So I didn't know I could
call it near-death experience
because there was no operating
table and no flatline.
And in those days, I didn't even
know who to talk to about it.
>> The morning of the sixth day,
Mary Fran's sister and I had
a shift.
From 3:00 to 5:00
AM in the morning,
we went and we sat with Nolan.
Hearing is the last
sense to go, so we were
talking to him the whole time.
And we told him that
we loved him very much,
and that he had been
such a brave boy
to try to stay with
us and to be with us
and he was really fighting hard.
But if his mother came--
I remember she had died in the
car accident six days before.
But if his mother
came, it was OK.
That he could leave
us and go with her.
>> My throat started
honking like a goose,
and then it started closing,
and then everything else went
in slow motion.
Two doctors walked in.
The same technician that had
been doing the skin tests
with me came back with another
technician and all four of them
were moving in slow motion.
To me, my perception was
they're barely moving.
>> When he flatlined, what
I experienced was Mary Fran
crossing the veil,
coming to her son,
and scooping him up out
of his physical body.
Somehow I got to
feel that somehow I
got to be with them as they
were having this reunion.
And it was this
glorious expression
of love between
mother and child.
>> And then there was
this popping sound.
Like if you hear
somebody pop the cork
on a bottle of champagne,
but it felt like it was off
in the distance.
But it was me leaving that body.
I stepped backwards and up
a little bit off the floor.
And I remember looking
at the back of my head
and I had this weirdest thought.
You don't know what
you're going to do
in a near-death experience.
Nobody prepares you for that.
And I looked at my
hair and thought,
I've got to fix that
spot right there.
And like, whoa, wait, I'm
looking at the back of my head.
>> And then to my surprise,
the two of them turned to me
and came over and embraced me.
And then the three of us
lifted and went to the light.
>> All the medical professionals
continued to move in slow
motion.
But now I noticed
they had changed.
Of course, it's my
perception that changed.
They looked flat like
cardboard cutouts.
They looked one-dimensional.
Their eyes were just dead.
There was nothing there,
where I was felt more real.
And I heard this
beautiful music.
>> These tears are a reflection
of this mixed emotion
of the death of two people
that I really cared about,
that I loved.
And tears of the most amazing,
wondrous, loving universe
that's out there that
is this far from us.
That is where we go when we
lift out of our physical body,
and I got to be there.
>> I felt the arms of my
grandfather who has passed.
I felt him around me and
I just knew it was him.
And I was like, oh, I
want to go with him.
Let's go see where that
music's coming from.
>> The three of us
were there for a while.
And then at some time--
and I don't know what
time means because I'm
at a spot where it doesn't
seem to make sense anymore.
But at some point, they turned
and left and went further
into the light, and then I
came back to my physical body.
>> And then I heard this
very robotic voice say,
your work hasn't started yet.
And I was just starting to
see all these beautiful colors
and next thing I know,
I'm back in the body,
they had an injection in me.
There was a technician holding
me up on this side and one
holding me up on this
side because they
don't want you to lie down,
they want to hold you up.
And all of a sudden, the
doctor said, she's breathing.
>> I had bilocated.
I was with Mary Fran
and Nolan in the light,
and I was in my physical
body at the same time.
So I had two distinctly
separate consciousnesses.
I split and was in
two locations at once.
And I know this because I have
such a clear memory of being
with Mary Fran and
Nolan and the light,
and I have an
incredibly clear memory
of being in the room with all
of the grieving relatives.
I mean, they're holding each
other and hugging each other
and crying on each
other's shoulder.
And I realized that my
face is showing this--
the love of the universe was
wanting to break out of me.
And my face was
entirely inappropriate
because I'm in joy, absolute
joy at where they are
and what I've been
able to experience.
That I know it's
going to be misread
by the people in the room.
So I wound up covering
my face with my hands
until I can compose myself.
And that's going
on at the same time
as I'm with them in the light.
And let's just say
that's not part
of the lexicon of the
Presbyterian tradition.
This idea that in the moment
of our greatest grief,
I'm in the moment
of my greatest joy.
And then I'm in two
locations at once.
And I can have complete
communion with Mary Fran
and Nolan and
communion with whatever
all that is at the same time.
I didn't have words for
that for the longest time.
>> Near-death is when you
start to take that journey
of dropping the veil and going
into the other side of life.
But you don't get
all the way there.
You get pulled
back into the body.
So for me to tell you
I know exactly what
heaven is like, the other side,
whatever you want to call it,
from a near-death experience
doesn't really work.
It's like I fly from
Phoenix to Singapore.
I get to Singapore,
I get off the plane,
I walk around the
airport, and then I
get right back on the
plane back to Phoenix.
I couldn't tell you a
thing about Singapore,
but the airport's nice.
>> DMT is dimethyltryptamine.
That is a molecule
that's found--
it's widespread in
the animal kingdom.
It's used a lot in
shamanic rituals
for mystical experiences
and things like that.
And we synthesize
it, we make it.
And new cool research showed
that it's made in our brain,
it's made in our choroid plexus,
it's made in the pineal gland.
And what endogenously--
endogenous means
what's in ourselves--
what it does endogenously,
we don't know yet.
They did induce
cardiac arrest in a rat
and showed that during
the cardiac arrest,
this level of DMT greatly
increased in the visual cortex.
So we don't know what that is.
It was hypothesized
that it's present
when you're born, when
we die, and possibly
during dream states,
so vivid dream states,
near death experiences.
The fact that it was
actually increased--
that it increased
in concentration
in the visual cortex while
these rats were undergoing
cardiac arrest is interesting.
Because many people have
described near-death
experiences where they've
seen bright lights or some--
where there's an image,
there's images coming to them.
So could that be because an
increase in DMT help people
have those visions?
>> Lucid dreaming is
all about awareness.
We're all aware right
now in the waking state,
we're effortlessly aware
and awake and conscious.
And in the dream state,
very often, we just
slide down into unconsciousness.
But the amazing thing is when
we raise our level of awareness
in the dream state,
then we become conscious
and we are then able to
interact with the dream
as we feel is best.
This waking up to
the dream state
enables us to engage consciously
with our deepest unconscious
images and emotions.
And that is a very
powerful thing
to be able to do
because it means
that we can react and respond
while a nightmare is happening,
for example.
There are people who can just--
they will have these recurring
nightmares of being chased.
And then they will
manage, finally,
to become lucid in that
recurring nightmare.
They'll turn around to face
their aggressor, their chaser.
And they will say, why
are you following me?
And the person will
respond, well, I don't know.
I thought you needed
me to follow you.
You need me for your fear,
or something like that.
And then the dreamer
will realize, wow,
my fear is self-created
to some extent.
And I can change it.
And I don't have to have
these nightmares every night.
I can change what's
happening in my unconscious.
And then very often,
they will then
find that in their
waking life, they
become less anxious because
something has shifted.
When something shifts inside
us on the unconscious level,
our waking life shifts as well.
>> This is a dream
that we're having.
It's a physical vibration
dream, daily reality.
And then the higher
part of the mental realm
is inspiration
and getting guides
and teachers and visions,
and all kinds of great stuff.
Very fluid, higher
level mental ideas.
So at night-- and
even during the day.
You may be at your desk
and then suddenly something
makes you think and
you're daydreaming,
or you're off thinking about
something that reminded you
of this other thing.
And then you come back to
your body and you're, oh.
So we're in and out, a lot even
in the daytime, but at night,
especially, because
we can really travel.
Because the left
brain's gone to sleep.
It is not judging anything.
It's not in the way.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> When we wake
up inside a dream,
it feels almost as if we've
been watching a black and white
movie and then it
suddenly turns to color.
Everything is so
vibrant, it feels
as if the objects are imbued
with conscious awareness.
We can touch things and
they feel super real.
We can hear, we can
smell, we can taste.
I actually know one guy
who keeps himself lucid,
who stays lucid in the
dream by licking things.
So he tastes whatever the
dream tastes or he'll just
lick something to raise
his consciousness,
to make him stay
lucid in the dream.
Because, of course, one of the
dangers when you become lucid
is you're so excited
to be lucid in a dream
that you just lose awareness.
You wake up and it's gone.
So we have to learn as well how
to stay in that lucid state.
If you stare at a fixed
point in a lucid dream,
you're more likely to wake up.
Perhaps because a lot of lucid
dreams take place in rapid eye
movement sleep, where there's
always this little eye
movement going on.
So to keep that going, just look
around and explore the dream.
Examine the dream,
engage with it,
touch it to get that clarity,
to keep yourself on that raised
level of consciousness.
It really helps to reach
out and touch something.
Engage with what's around us.
If there's a tree there, go and
run your hand down the bark.
If you see a friend,
give them a hug.
Or just simply rub
your hands together.
That can really, really
help to just wake you
up a little bit more so that
you stay lucid for longer.
A really good way to
begin to have lucid dreams
is to try to raise your level of
awareness in your waking life.
You can do that by
asking yourself regularly
throughout the
day, am I dreaming?
Am I dreaming this right now?
And really look around
and think about it.
Don't just dismiss it.
Look around.
How do we know that we're
not dreaming right now?
This is how real it
can be in a dream.
Dreams fool us all the
time with their reality.
You can do reality
checks as well.
You can say, OK, well, let's
see if I'm dreaming or not.
I'll see if I can't put
my finger through my hand.
Yeah, and if you really,
really can't, then
I guess you're awake.
Also the nose pinch, where you
pinch your nostrils closed.
And if we do that
when we're awake,
we can't breathe
through our nose.
But if you do it
in a dream, you can
because you haven't blocked
your physical nostrils.
You can mix it up with those
little kind of reality checks.
We can have the feeling that we
live an entire lifetime in one
lucid dream.
Time flows differently.
Research studies
have been done to see
if lucid dreamers can count
time the way that we count it.
So counting out the seconds.
And they're actually
pretty good at doing that.
So time is a funny
thing in general,
but also in lucid dreams.
Your brain is such
an amazing thing.
It saves everything
you've ever heard.
So in my dreams, I
used to fly to France.
People were speaking in
exactly the way they had spoken
when I was living in France.
And that helped me to
really practice my French.
When we practiced a particular
skill in a lucid dream,
scientists believe
that strengthens
the neuronal pathways
in the brain.
There was a
fist-clenching experiment
that was carried out.
They asked subjects to clench
their fists while awake,
clench their fists
in their imagination.
And then to become
lucid in a dream,
and then clench their fist.
And so researchers
were able to see
the fist-clenching
in a lucid dream
will actually light up
the same part of the brain
as if we did it in waking life.
So it's definitely something
to this whole connection,
this physical connection with
what we do in the dream state.
>> To me, it's all real.
We are functioning at different
frequencies of ourselves
in the different dream zones.
So if you start
recording your dreams
and you figure out what
you're doing at night,
you can start to see what your
growth process is all about.
Because often, a lot of
the subconscious stuff
will pop up in the dreams that
you wouldn't allow yourself
to have in the waking
state because you
have a monitor on it.
I'm not going to
think about that.
But at night, sure,
it pops right through.
So it's very helpful.
And also for just loosening
up your creativity.
It's such a nice,
wonderful rubbery state
that you can do all
kinds of things in there
and whatever you want.
There's a lot of freedom.
So if you play with that,
you can start to see,
well, I could do that
when I'm awake too.
So it's very empowering.
>> It's being found that we can
improve sports skills when we
are lucid in our dream.
One guy would magic
a swimming pool
and he would practice his
swim strokes really precisely,
really feeling his body
moving through the water.
And sometimes for fun,
he would be a bit playful
and he'd make the swimming
pool fill with yogurt or honey.
The end of the story was
that he got the highest
mark possible for his swimming.
>> With psychic phenomena,
how do you know that you feel
anything?
It's all about your
internal sense of awareness.
There's thousands of
different kinds of experiences
that people talk about.
You have clairvoyance, which,
in its modern euphemism,
is remote viewing,
which is perceiving
through space and time.
The time part is sometimes
called precognition.
Sometimes you see backwards in
time, so that's retrocognition.
This kind of experience
is you go to a place
and you see people in
period costumes apparently
and everything looks old.
You're wondering,
what's happening here?
Well, it's like a retro
cognitive sense of the place,
but sometime in the past.
>> Precognition is, in my
view, a human birthright.
And actually, I think
there's evidence
that other animals have it.
But certainly among humans,
I think everyone has it.
And the question is, can
you get conscious of it,
and what's your skill level
with communicating it to others?
And so you can learn that.
You can learn to
get conscious of it,
and you can learn to
communicate it to others.
It's very much like
musical ability.
I don't think it's that hard
to teach most people how
to hum a simple tune,
which is, I think,
the equivalent of
teaching people
how to do controlled
precognition.
Most people can do it.
And they're actually impressed
with themselves when they do it
because we don't usually think
we can predict the future.
But to get to the level of skill
that it's operational and can
be used, like to become an opera
singer or the first violinist
in a symphony orchestra, there's
a lot of practice involved.
And you probably wouldn't
practice that much
if you didn't have
that initial talent.
>> I was a returning student
living in the Chicago area.
After taking several years
off to get married and have
kids and all that thing, I had
recently come across a paper
that Hal Puthoff
and Russell Targ
had published about their
remote viewing work.
They mentioned in the paper
that sometimes the percipient
could describe the scene
before it was selected.
And I came up short on that.
I said, the distance
part doesn't bother me,
but the time part, I don't know.
That's really hard to swallow.
>> And when we study
intuition in a science form,
often we'll call it remote
viewing because there,
the person has no way to
know the information except
for psychically.
>> So there I was, a suburban
housewife on a Sunday afternoon
folding laundry.
And I'm thinking about this.
And I'm thinking
about it and I said,
I'm going to just think
about a friend of mine
and see if I can figure
out where she's going
to be at 5:30 this evening.
And then I'll call her tonight
and find out where she was.
The thought had no
sooner hit me than I
had this image or this
feeling of her walking
in the woods, which
was not something
that was typical for her.
She would have been bike riding
or playing tennis or something.
And I said, OK, I'll
just call her later
and see where she was at 5:30.
This was at about
4:00 o'clock or 4:30.
Anyway, 5:20 or so comes,
the doorbell rings.
There's my friend standing
outside and saying,
I've been going
stir crazy and I was
thinking it would be nice to
go take a walk in the woods.
Would you like to come?
And after I picked my
chin up off the floor,
I was just blown away.
I decided this was too much.
I had to explore it.
>> I created a protocol, for
what I call distant viewing
in those days, in my back garden
of this house that I was in.
I laid out a grid
that was 12 squares.
And I would take mason
jars and put things in them
and bury them in this grid.
I had a mimeograph paper--
that's how old this
was, mimeographs--
that was just the grid.
And I would send it
out to people and say,
can you try to locate
which square in the grid
has something buried
there, and can you
describe for me what it is.
And I discovered that
people could do it.
>> A computer may pick a
target that no human has seen
in California, and the remote
viewer may be in Virginia.
They will draw that target
out with such precision
that if you wanted to know, say,
the target was a dish, where
the dish was made and
how many kids the person
who packed the dish
into the container had,
you could find that
information out.
So you can access all
information without regard
to time or space.
You can go forward in the
future, back in the past.
>> Most of the researchers who
do this kind of work start out
with, is this stuff real?
My question was, what can you
do with it of practical utility,
how can you do that, and
what is it telling us
about who we are as human beings
and our place in the universe?
There was a huge
discussion at that time.
Most archeological finds
were made serendipitously.
They were doing road work
and they revealed a temple,
or some farmer was
plowing in a field
and found a burial or whatever.
We used this protocol that I had
designed in Alexandria, Egypt
to locate the
Palace of Cleopatra,
the Palace of Mark
Antony, the Timonium,
the Lighthouse of
Pharos, one of the seven
wonders of the ancient world.
You can see this.
It's upon YouTube, The
Alexandria Project.
You can find it.
Watch it happen.
>> Our remote viewer
here, Joe McMoneagle,
has found ancient temple sites
in Japan that nobody knew
about.
He has worked with
the government
for 20 years in their
program, and could draw,
in high detail, the inside of
a new submarine the Soviets had
before it was ever launched.
>> I wouldn't do
classified research.
I felt that anything we
knew about consciousness,
given the state of
humanity, we ought
to make immediately available.
>> Could remote viewers locate
an unknown shipwreck on the sea
floor?
That is, could they look through
hundreds of feet of seawater
and locate a previously
unknown wreck on the sea floor?
So I got a chart and I
sent it out to 11 people.
And I said to them,
please go over this chart
and locate an unknown sea wreck.
That came to be known
as Project Deep Quest.
I filmed it also,
it's up on YouTube.
I got Leonard Nimoy
to narrate it.
>> We are dancing with parts
greater than ourselves that we
don't fully understand.
That may be our higher self,
it may be guides and angels,
it may be God, it
may be all kinds
of things that were accessing
beyond our personality and ego.
>> Precognition in remote
viewing are related
in the sense that precognition
is a larger umbrella term that
includes multiple ways in which
you could be precognitive.
So one way is
physiologically, your body
can predict future events that
you don't even consciously know
it's predicting.
Before an important
event occurs,
you might have had the
experience of a zing going
through your body, like,
wait, something's going on.
>> They did a study based on
a factor called interoception.
That's when you're able
to sense your heartbeat
or sense your viscera.
Some people are
very good at that.
For reasons I don't understand,
I can just sit down and be calm
and I can feel my
heartbeat all the time.
Well, other people can't.
So people who are good
at that tend to do much,
much better in terms of day
trading with futures than ones
who don't.
And so you can learn
to pay attention
to these what amounts to
signals coming from your body.
And, yeah, you could
get better at it.
One of the common ones is
you're driving to work one day
and you're reaching
an intersection.
You have a green
light, everything
seems to be working fine.
You have an internal sense that
something's not quite right
so you start slowing down.
And people behind
you are thinking
what is wrong with you.
So you slow down, slow down.
You still have a green light
and you're going really slow,
and suddenly somebody
shoots through the red light
and would have hit you broadside
if you didn't slow down.
Maybe that suggests that his
peripheral vision, maybe you
saw something you didn't
even realize you saw it.
But maybe also you
had a premonition
that something bad
was about to happen.
And so you didn't know
exactly what it was,
but you just slowed down anyway.
So we take that into the
laboratory into an experiment
we call presentiment,
which is not precognition.
It's not pre-knowing,
but it's pre-feeling.
Since it's not
something that you know,
we have to use your body
as an indicator of what's
about to happen.
We measure your heart rate
or your skin conductance
or your pupil dilation
or your brainwaves.
Sometimes we measure all
of them at the same time.
>> Having someone in the room
that knows what the target is,
is going to make you
potentially tune in to what
they're thinking about
instead of the actual event.
You can use a random number
generator to produce events,
like showing a picture of a
plane crash versus a picture
of a pair of shoes.
So something more neutral.
No one on the planet
knows what the target is,
and then you can
actually get information
that you know is free
of anyone else's bias.
>> If, in fact, you're feeling
your future physiological
state, maybe that you
feel something in your gut
that's not quite right.
Then before you see one of these
negative or emotional pictures,
maybe the body begins to
become more emotional even
though, in this case, there's no
peripheral information at all.
It has to come from the
future because nobody
knows in advance
what's about to show up
by the design of the experiment.
So this experiment has been
done many, many times now.
>> You can see beforehand,
when you analyze the data,
the difference between
the physiology leading up
to the randomly selected
emotional image versus
the randomly selected
neutral image.
>> Virtually, every
physiological measure that we
look at does respond between
around 1 and 9 seconds before
the image comes up in
an appropriate way.
That's an example of taking a
relatively common experience,
putting it into a
laboratory context
where it's extremely
controlled, and that you
can exclude all of the
usual mundane explanations.
And what you're left
with is apparently
the fact that we can know
between 1 and 9 seconds
or so what is about to happen.
>> Do we look into the future,
or do we somehow or other tap
into the probabilities
of a possible future?
I don't know the answer to that.
I don't believe the future
is set and absolute.
I think, like
everything else, there's
a probabilistic aspect to it.
>> Another example is
compulsive precognition,
where you don't know why
you have to do something,
you just have to do it.
And then once you
do it, you come back
and you recognize, oh, if I had
been there during that time,
something horrible
would have happened.
There's an officer in the
military, relatively high up,
and he's in Iraq in his van.
And he was just waiting around
for the next thing to happen.
And it was really hot.
And he was sitting
on a cooler of water.
So he could absolutely have
had some water from the cooler.
[LAUGHS]
But that's not what he did.
He felt compelled.
He said, no, I don't want water.
I want this kind of iced tea
that I have to get up out
of here to go get.
Now that's ridiculous.
I could just have the water.
Nope, I'm going to
get the iced tea.
So he stands up, he goes and
gets the iced tea, comes back.
And he can't go back because
a mortar had landed right
near the van.
If he had been there,
he might have been right
in the way of this situation.
So that's an example of
compulsive precognition.
>> How can you explain a
phenomenon that doesn't respond
to space and time?
>> That's an anecdotal story.
That's not an experiment.
>> The only conclusion I
personally can come to is that
space and time are not
characteristics of the physical
world.
They are characteristics
of our consciousness.
Or, as Albert
Einstein once said,
they're there to keep everything
from happening all at once.
>> The basic message is time
doesn't work the way we think
it does.
And you can get
information through time
and use that information
if you're compelled to,
and if you feel
you have the talent
and you want to develop it.
>> If information is flowing
from the outside world
into you, it's somewhat passive,
this would be called the ESP.
So it's precognition
and clairvoyance.
If the information is going out
from you somehow and changing
the world, then
it's psychokinetic.
>> Most people would define
that as affecting matter with
your mind.
>> Using your intention to
change or manipulate the world
in some way outside of yourself.
>> They said explore,
experiment, expand,
play to really
widen your horizons.
We were having a time to
play with the energies
we'd been working with.
And we had a gaming night.
There were dice there.
And I found myself going
into that same energy--
wide open heart, warm hands,
connected to the Earth really
strongly, but connected
with spirit as well.
And I found I could roll
what I wanted on the dice.
OK, so seven, seven in a
row, that kind of thing.
And that's studiable.
Some of the things I'm
really interested in
is when we do PK versus rest
when there's no psychokinesis.
What's going on in the brain?
So we do a 128 lead
EEG on a person's head.
And we find real
interesting EEG results
when the PK is going on
versus control or rest times.
Most of those things
are boring in a lab
and tough to do because
that one, for example,
is 48 seconds on, 48
seconds off, 48 seconds on
for hundreds trials in a row
after spending the half hour
getting that EEG on.
I'm a psychologist so I
looked at the motivation
to keep this really
juicy for people
so their performance would not
rise and then fall and become
boring to them.
And that's where the
Vegas stuff comes in.
Because it's definitely exciting
when you do it in Vegas and you
hit something at 200
million to 1 by chance.
You might also have some cash to
show as a prize for doing that.
In meditation, for example,
before I go to a slot machine,
I may visualize exactly what
I want, such as a royal flush
in hearts.
That's 160,000 to 1 by chance,
and I'll go down and hit it
in the first pull.
So that gives me proof
that this was real.
I've meditated.
I've raised my energy.
And when I go down, I'm also
checking intuition as the time
right now and is this
the machine to do it on.
>> If you wanted to
understand the data underlying
precognition, there's a bunch
of information out there.
Go to Google Scholar and just
look up precognitive abilities.
You could also look up
predictive anticipatory
activity to find any
of that information.
So go have at it.
If what that data
were about some kind
of new drug for some
kind of disease,
people would be taking
the drug for that disease.
My experience going
into the academic world
and giving talks
about this stuff
to, basically, people
who are largely
interested but skeptical, first
of all, they'll ask questions,
well, have you thought of this?
And often, they'll
have you thought
of this will be like the most
basic thing that, of course,
you thought of.
But they're just learning to
think about this so they're
going to-- they should ask.
But after the talk, they'll come
up to you and, one by one, say,
can I talk to you afterwards?
Can we just talk privately?
I just want to tell
you my experience
I had about this dream
that was so real,
and then it happened
the next day.
And then the next person,
can I just have your card?
And then you get an email--
I didn't want to say it
in front of anyone else,
but I had this experience
the night before my aunt died
and she wasn't sick and--
and then the next person,
and the next person.
And at some point, I started
saying, talk to each other.
You're all having
this experience.
Talk to each other.
>> The topic is
so controversial,
you cannot get it published.
We tried to send one paper
into a physics journal.
The editor thought it was fine,
but the publishers, the higher
ups, were very uncomfortable
with the topic.
Usually, when you send
a paper for publication,
they send it to two, maybe
three reviewers or referees.
Well, this paper went out to
something like 21 referees.
I mean, it was getting
really rather silly.
Until at one point, we
said, look, why don't we
just go with the majority
vote, at a point when
we knew we were one ahead.
And the paper got published.
>> I worked at the University
of Nevada in Las Vegas
for a while.
And so there, one of
the sociologists I knew
was studying prostitution
in Las Vegas.
Well, Las Vegas
businesspeople did not
like it to be known publicly
that this was going on,
even though everybody
knew that it was.
And so her ability to do
that research and publish it
was tamped down to the point
where she could not do it.
And that's just one
of many examples
where if there's some
community that says,
we don't want that to be out
there, they will stop it.
We can look back at tobacco
and all kinds of things
that were, at one
time, suppressed
for political or
business reasons.
And that's no different
in this domain.
>> There are some things that
are very hard to get with
remote viewing.
It's hard to get analytical
things like names or numbers
or dates.
But remote viewers are really
good at describing the sense
impressions about an object.
So, could you communicate
with a submarine
using associated imagery?
So I needed a submarine.
John Warner, who was the
Secretary of the Navy,
invited me to go up to
Groton, Connecticut with him.
And on the plane
was Hyman Rickover,
the father of the
American nuclear navy
and the nuclear submarines.
And I asked him if he would
let me do this experiment.
And he said, let
me get back to you.
Let me think about it.
He was quite interested in it.
And he called me, I don't
know, a week, 10 days later.
And he said, that's a really
interesting experiment
but I'm not going to do it.
It'll leak out, it'll
get a lot of attention,
and we just don't want it.
So I'm sorry, I'm
not going to do it.
>> I did a consulting job for
a big hotel chain that wanted
to integrate empathy
into their core values.
Real empathy.
The kind of empathy that
doesn't resolve easily
into a spreadsheet to
help them understand
what it was to actually be
tuned in with another person.
And they were not
available to that message.
They wanted it in theory, but
in practice, it was a grind.
>> I know a lot of my colleagues
who have had their labs burned
down and their lives threatened
and things like that.
For some reason, I guess
my angels are working hard.
>> There's always a worldview
by which science is bounded more
or less.
But if you ask questions that
go beyond that conventional
worldview, you're out
there in frontier science.
>> I just have to be in the
lab and do the experiments
because most conventional
scientists won't.
>> It's different from what
some people might call fringe
science, which is really far
out topics that aren't necessary
substantiated by
experiment conjectures.
But my science is largely
experimental, also
with some theory
underlying it, where
we try to validate
what we're studying
by scientific experiments.
>> My attitude is, well, if
they accept it, that's great.
I don't care what the mainstream
people criticize, or whatever
or whatever.
I'm here to do the work.
And if it's not recognized
while I'm living,
it will be recognized
50 years from now.
>> I remember going to
a conference in the UK.
I think that was 2003.
Yeah, 2003, I think it was.
And I said, I'm
doing my PhD while I
sleep in my lucid dreams.
That's where I'm doing
my research, which
is a bit preposterous to hear.
But it was true.
But people in the
audience were like, what
are you saying, how
could that be possible,
and lucid dreaming doesn't
really exist, and all of this.
And so then I gave them
the scientific facts.
And some people as
well in that audience
came up to me afterwards and
said, I'm a psychoanalyst
and I have worked for
30 years with dreams
and I've never heard
about lucid dreaming.
And I think it could
really help my clients.
>> In the 1960s, there was a
lot of research going on with
psychedelics.
Well, that got pushed
underground very quickly
and it became illegal.
That is rising very
quickly as well.
Because the moment you
start doing research
on something as dramatic as
a psychedelic experience,
you realize that there's a whole
bunch of very useful things
that you can do in those states.
People who have a
terminal illness
and are facing enormous amounts
of fear and angst over it,
they can have a psychedelic
experience, which gives them
a mystical experience, and
their fear of death vanishes.
They will say then, not only
terminally ill patients,
but other people will say
that the experience they
have under the right conditions
with something like psilocybin
is the most profound experience
in their entire life.
Well, that's pretty good.
So it's quite different than
the chaos that was surrounding
psychedelics in the '60s.
It's more mature
now, more controlled.
But it's an example of where
aspects of consciousness that
are normally pushed aside,
as like the only thing
you should pay attention to
is the here and now, well,
that's a very small
slice of reality.
>> There's a lot of important
issues and we each just have
our piece of the puzzle.
But the more we can
understand and know
what our piece of the
puzzle is and do that
without the resistance that
comes from being told that what
we want to do is
wrong, then I think
we can really, collectively,
make a huge difference.
>> In the academic world, you
can study these phenomena from
the point of view
of anthropology,
certainly from psychology in
terms of belief and what people
experience.
But from a scientific
perspective,
it's very, very rare
to find anywhere
in the world which is
using scientific approaches
to studying these
phenomena, even
though most people actually
have these experiences.
It's a very strange taboo,
but it's quite strong.
>> Someone would say, well,
you're now assuming that mental
things are somehow different
than physical things.
And mental things
behave differently
than the rules we expect
for physical things
where causality
is a certain way.
That's a common discussion.
And I say, yeah, so
what's your evidence
that mental things aren't
different from physical things?
They sure seem
different in every way.
Having a thought sure seems like
something that isn't physical.
It doesn't have any physical
properties like location.
The thought of the color green
has no location, has no mass,
it has no frequency, no
spin, no phase, no charge.
How is it in any way like
anything else that's physical?
They'll say, then
that's dualism--
which is just a bludgeon.
And I say, of
course, it's dualism.
I'm saying mental
and physical things
are two different things.
That's two, that's dualism.
And then there's nothing.
There's no argument.
So the argument is
just, you can't possibly
be a dualist because
that's not allowed
in the world of
science, you see.
Because mental things
don't really exist,
but physical things do.
And the history of that has
a lot to do with behaviorism.
At least in psychology,
it has a lot
to do with behaviorism
coming out.
Behaviorism was all
about, we're going
to figure out what's going
on in people's minds, which
don't really exist, by looking
at the input and output
relationships because
that's what we can see.
What if we actually went inside?
The thing about mental things
rather than physical things
is you can actually
go inside experiences
because you're
having an experience
and you can discover things.
That's a different--
that's a different tool.
But it's still a
scientific tool.
>> Students, especially, they
would love to study psychic
phenomena.
And yet you don't see it
in the academic world.
We're talking about
administrators.
senior professors.
We're talking about
people who hold
what amounts to the acceptable
topics to talk about.
>> There's a fear, often, that
can constrain you in academia.
The underlying fear is the
fear of being shamed for not
being right, for being a fool.
You don't want to be a fool.
The whole point of
academia is, we're
going to figure out
what's really going on
and we're going to
be right about it.
And if you don't
understand this,
you don't really understand
what's really going on.
You're a fool.
You don't want to be on
the outside of the cult.
>> The university administrator
just does not want anything bad
to happen ever.
So they're more afraid
of being embarrassed
than they are of dying.
And they don't want to have
to explain to somebody,
oh, yeah, we have
in this department,
we're studying this weird stuff.
They just say, no, we're
not doing anything weird.
We're completely normal.
That's the administrator
mindset, which I understand.
Only unusual places, unusual
universities or institutes
like ours where we say, well,
we don't care what you think.
This is what we're doing
because we think it's
an interesting thing to do.
>> See, at PEAR, we
were very fortunate.
We had an
interdisciplinary staff.
We had physicists, and
psychologists, and engineers.
All of these people
working together
on a topic that had no answers.
We didn't even
know the questions.
But we did find that when
we put our heads together,
each of us coming from our
own unique point of view,
we were discovering things that
we never would have seen alone.
>> If you look back,
maybe 30 years ago,
and you were trying to
find conferences to go
to on consciousness, it would
have been very, very difficult.
Both in the public domain
and in the academic domains,
they didn't happen.
Now we're saturated with them.
There are conferences
all over the place,
around the world
on consciousness
and aspects of consciousness.
And it includes philosophy
and science and neuroscience
and everything else, but they're
there and they're very popular.
There are journals based on it.
There are centers
at universities now.
So that has
significantly changed.
It's hard to see the
change if it's slow.
It's a 30-year cycling up.
But that's likely to remain.
>> To me, I'm all about, let's
change the culture that look
at it as some problem.
Instead get out
there, like, look,
this is scientifically
validated.
It's a small effect on average,
some people are talented.
But almost anyone can improve
their abilities to the extent
that we can develop
this as humanity
and get more
operational about it.
We could actually shift our
understanding of the future
and navigate the future
more effectively.
So given that, how are you
going to use it for good?
[THEME MUSIC]